---
title: "Paic2019"
draft: true
showthedate: false
enabletoc: false
tags:
- reference
---

#### **Governance of science and technology policies**     
by Paic A., Viros C. (2019)         
OECD      

**Abstract**:  This document provides learnings from 13 case studies on governance mechanisms of national and supranational science, technology and innovation initiatives. As countries strive to resolve societal challenges, “mission-oriented” approaches complement traditional ones centred on national competitiveness, specific industrial sectors or technologies. Governance settings contribute overall to a more inclusive, transparent and responsible STI system, in particular through a whole-of-government approach, the consultation of academia, the private sector and civil society, the implementation of strategies by professional agencies, and the increasingly common use of evaluation. Several critical dimensions facilitate the success of STI policies. They include a commitment at the highest level of government, strong public-private collaboration in R&amp;D, continuous evaluation and improvement, a “mission-oriented” approach, coherence of policies and flexibility in setting priorities, as well as overall harmonisation and rationalisation of programmes in order to maximise efficiency and reduce duplication.




> [!quote] 

>
>
>Commitment at the highest level of government is a crucial means to send a signal to all stakeholders. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 5) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Mission-oriented” policies aiming to resolve grand societal challenges —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 6) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Systematic evaluation and monitoring enables governments to continuously improve the policy framework and ensure increasing impact over time. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 6) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Governments need to demonstrate flexibility in setting priorities to be able to respond to increasingly rapid technological and societal evolutions. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 6) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Available programmes are being harmonised and rationalised, to simplify and optimise target stakeholders’ access to the available subsidies and programmes. This limits the number of calls and proposes a single “window” for users in order to enhance efficiency in the granting of finance and reduce administrative costs. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 6) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>They are top-down initiatives responding to needs that are perceived as urgent by society (societal challenges), with strong political support (which has both advantages and disadvantages). —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 12) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Implication at the highest level sends a signal to all the stakeholders that will follow —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 31) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Greater public-private collaboration in R&D is strongly encouraged —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 31) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>This is a strong trend, observed in all of the cases studied —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 31) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>This is meant to generate increased motivation among the actors – beyond remuneration and academic recognition, the awareness of contributing to a great and noble cause is an incentive for surpassing oneself —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 32) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Motivated by the historical approach, which led to the conquest of space and advances in the field of defence or nuclear energy, mission-oriented policies today seek to orient programmes towards the resolution of challenges linked to the climate, ageing, sustainable mobility, biodiversity and other grand challenges. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 32) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>start-up nation” to a “smart nation —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 32) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>requires consultations and long consensus-building processes, but parallel working groups and ad hoc committees must have room to manoeuvre in order to react more quickly to contextual evolutions. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 33) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>Harmonisation and rationalisation of available programmes, to simplify and optimise target stakeholders’ access to the available subsidies and programmes. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 33) 

>

> [!quote] 
>
>The large number of instruments and programmes available in most of the strategies studied makes it difficult for users to navigate among them and increases the risk of duplication. Rationalising and simplifying the programmes, limiting the number of calls and proposing a single “window” for users are ways to enhance efficiency in the granting of finance, reduce administrative costs (for participants and programme administrators), and maximise the impact of the strategy put in place. —  (Paic et Viros, 2019, p. 33) 


