
---
title: "marketization_of_scientific_research"
date: 2023-01-05
draft: false
showthedate: true
enabletoc: true
tags:
- note
---

We gives five caracteristics of the marketization and industrialisation of research. 

#### Exogeous cause prevail on endogeous one
When Polanyi ([Polanyi1962](reference/Polanyi1962.md)) emphasizes that the "continued existence" of Science depends on its "self-renewal", he points to the fact that the research entreprise for societies does not need an exogeous cause to evolve. In contrast, market needs one (an "accident" to which to  react) to change its prices ([Hayek1945](reference/Hayek1945.md)). Once the market has operated those changes, prices stop evolving, an equilibrium has been reached. Making research activities offer respond to external demand is a first characteristic of marketisation.  When ending a project, we usually have unresolved questions. However, they never have been so clear and we are convinced that they are good questions. Whitin this respect, we can consider that asking relevant questions is one of the central capacity of a researcher. However, scientists can lose their capacity to design original research projects, if they are not accepted.  The loss of the capacity to design original research projects, because this role has been conferred to the market mecanisms. In this process, the art of identifying and expliciting relevant scientific directions is externalized and assured automatically to make the scientific offer meet "stakeholders" demand ([Paic2019](reference/Paic2019.md)). The latter stem from an average of concerns[^1] at a given time, which is constituated by a protocole and takes the form of a "mission-oriented" project. This transfer of know-how to a mechanized machinary corresponds Marx's idea of proletarization ([Marx2005](reference/Marx2005.md)), extended to the capacity to design following Stielger ([Stiegler2012](reference/Stiegler2012.md), [Alombert2021](reference/Alombert2021.md)). From a larger perspective, this is loss begins with the introduction of competitive project-based fundings that indirectly drive the elaboration of projects towards predefined directions. 

A word a "mission-oriented".
 

>[!warning]
>
> + automaticity of design (taking the mean, no commitment, disruption du second order, entropy, [Longo2013](reference/Longo2013.md) "common sense", (Stielger,montévil,Bifurquer). Disruption du second order.
> + Real role of citizens and "Ivory towel". Credit impot research, end of research for mutinational, pillage des fonds publics.  [Blok2015](reference/Blok2015.md). 


#### Smith's inert employee principle prevail upon Merton's irreducible curiosity momentum
Principles frame how we understand phenomena. In *The Wealth of Nations*, Adam Smith posits the equivalent of Gallileo's inertial principle: "It is the interest of every man to live as much at his ease as he can, (...)" ([Smith1887](reference/Smith1887.md)). This principle is framing capitalism, because it implies that people are lazy and that they work if and only if they are paid ([Schwartz2015](reference/Schwartz2015.md)). In contrast, Merton posited another principle for research: "the pursuit of science is culturally defined as being primarily a disinterested search for truth and only secondarily, a means of earning a livelihood." ([Merton1957](reference/Merton1957.md)). Merton therefore acknowledge a principled momentum due to curiosity. Depending which principle about human nature is adopted, science policies change and the vocabulary with it.  In one case, the "scientific workforce" is given "incentives" to which it "responds". Researchers do not ask interesting enough questions and one must prompt them to take more risks ([OECD2021a](reference/OECD2021a.md)). Management practices come into play to maximize productivity such that the "awareness of contributing to a great and noble cause" make them "proud of being European" ([Carlos Moedas](https://www.openaccessgovernment.org/lamy-report-ensuring-inspirational-research/34970/)), "an incentive for surpassing oneself" ([Paic2019](reference/Paic2019.md)). On the other hand, adopting the second principle, it is acknowledged that research is grounded in human's curiosity. Therefore, science policies would reflect on how to maintain this curiosity productive, be it by encouraging specific lifestyles and advise against other (such as too much work), reflect on how researchers collaborate, etc. 


#### Symmetrization of individuals and consequences for distinguishing
In biographies, we depict scientists (a fortiori famous one such as Einstein, Bohr, Curie) as being original, excentric, not playing by the rules, within a real specificity etc. On the other hand, the scientific workforce does not refer to this. In this view, the scientific "workforce" is commutable, discoveries do not depend on specific researchers. This focus the attention on the quantitative aspect of research such as the concentration of elementary and identical — or unidimensionallized (good or bad) depending on the output rate — scientists in specific domains. This builds on the dominant positivist philosophy in Science that consider their subjectivity as a noise when probing the natural world. This loss of individuality is translated in impersonal format of scientific articles, in the name of objectivity. The structure of scientific articles (IMRaD) contextualize a single unbiased observation to transform it into knowledge. They gather easy-to-find informations to communicate more efficiently ([Montevil2021](reference/Montevil2021.md)). This reveals a cumulative view of knowledge — already present in Polanyi's puzzle metaphor —  and points to a market-like communication of information. In contrast, experimenting is a project that stage a highly specific situation of the world. It is motivated by a scientific goal and derives from a subjective interpretation of the theoretical framework it relies upon. Also, using the informational language implies that the receiver and the emeter are left unchanged during the process. This is absolutely not the goal in research, where one should be at least in part surprised in reading articles.

Once, they are all the same, how to distinguish them? By merit. 
Similar individuals that compete with one another, resorting to individualism and "commercial morals". 
Peculiar and heterogeneous individuals collaborating with each other to produce robust scientific knowledge. 
They are all self-interested agents.

Individualism and "commercial morals" instead of collaboration aare consequences of symmetrization

Research make sense only as a collective work and one's work always builds on others. In this tradition, the "mutual adjustement of independent initiative" stage actors that are "self-interested" only to a given extent, because the work they produce is by construction dedicated to other researchers ([Chavalarias2020a](reference/Chavalarias2020a.md)). As division of labor prevail upon overlapping neighborhoods, researchers compete to publish for a third party (*concurrence*), and not for themselves (*complementary* or *antagonism*). In a way, less attention is provided to the robustness of the results, pedagogy, plausibility of promises ([Audetat2015](reference/Audetat2015.md)), reproducibility ([Baker2016](reference/Baker2016.md)) or even integrity ([Fang2012](reference/Fang2012.md), [Edwards2017](reference/Edwards2017.md)). Bibliometrics index and other tools to create artificial competition have unsurprinsingly confirmed Goodhart's law ([Fire2019](reference/Fire2019.md)). In fact, Merton ([Merton1957](reference/Merton1957.md)) already predicted that competion beyond the "natural" linear regime — i.e. competition to get the priority of a discovery for reputation — deteriorates science. Despite policy makers willing to instaure a climate of "Darwinian selection" bewteen scientists ([Petit2019a](reference/Petit2019a.md)), evidences linking a lower quality of science due to, for instance, rushing keep cropping up ([Anderson2007](reference/Anderson2007.md), [Chavalarias2016](reference/Chavalarias2016.md), [Yong2018](reference/Yong2018.md), [Hill2020](reference/Hill2020.md)). The process of fostering individualism and egoism also relate the neoliberal market spirit in research, through the concept of "commercial morals" ([Lazebnik2018](reference/Lazebnik2018.md)). In a word, it relates to the pitfall of self-evaluating your research based on the rationale that "my scientific production is good *because* it is accepted by journals". Making good research is then assimilated to the capacity of getting your papers accepted in specific journals. In a market system, where there is "a moral justification for selfishness (...)" ([Hayek1979](reference/Hayek1979.md)), this behavior would indeed (supposedly) participates in building the greater good. In fact, economists of science tackle fraud from a purely individualistic perspective by evaluating risks/benefits ratio[^2]. Following this line, "selling your research" is an activity that is encouraged in order to convince researchers or journals by all means. Such practices (oversimplification, omission, camouflage, etc.) can only harm the collective scientific activity in the long-term. 

#### Taylor's division of labour prevail upon Polanyi's overlapping neigbourhood (separability)
Overlapping neighborhood ensure shared expertise on a specific subject. It is the place where the authority of scientific standards is ensured and where critical thinking takes place. In fact, we can understand the peer review process described by Polanyi's scientific standards, with Morin's dialogical principle, that is the association of two complementary, antagonistic and competitive logics (conformism and dissent here). Morin's dialogical principle insists on the non-resolution of the conflicts in the larger entity that cannot be reduced to mere juxtaposition of the two. It is the active organization of the actions carried out following both logics that constitutes whole entity and not an efficient action that would follow an effective logic, one where conflicts are resolved. When modifying the dialogical nature of the scientific standards by defining a third criteria such as relevance with respect to societal needs, the complementary aspect and the *antagonism* (*anta* which is face-to-face and *agônisma*, struggle) no longer play a role. Efforts are canalized within the third heteronome aspect that solely permit *competition* (*concurrence*, *concourir* in french), a race toward the same objective. This effect can certainly be related to the "epistemic drift" described in ([Elzinga1997](reference/Elzinga1997.md)). This semantic turn allows us to articulate a regime of theoretical disputes for the best arguments on common subjects to a regime where free competition gives you the liberty to isolate yourself from existing competition. This allows you to create a new specific field, far from competition to optimize your chance of having the priority over a discovery ([Merton1957](reference/Merton1957.md)). According to Morin, the most fundamental condition for science to exists lies: "what must be absolutly safeguarded is the conflictual plurality in a game that obeys empirico-logical rules" ([Morin1982](reference/Morin1982.md), p. 24). We should understand Morin's idea not only as a sufficient but also necessary condition. When this "epistemic drift" becomes important, the overlapping neighborhood area decreases and we enter a regime of division of labour, that is "scientific" organization of reasearch. The allocation of grants will be "optimize" in order to avoid "risk of duplication" and 'limiting the number of calls and proposing a single “window” ([Paic2019](reference/Paic2019.md)). 

*Everything happens like if, under the requirement of participating to at least one match of a infinite box competition, you allowed the possibility of chosing the referee position. You are no longer guaranteed that matches still take place.* In fact, the need to argue and defend you research requires the need to reflect about it. You need to find arguments. Having an adversory prompts you to prepare, look in the history of science, see that others  points of view exists, fix you non-scientifiic ideas about it, etc. 
The separation between philosophy and science swepping out reflexivity from the scientific activity. Scientific disciplines have a long history, they use specific methods and rely on metaphysical assumptions. Elementary history and philosophy of science helps in replacing the scientific activity for the cultural "tradition" it is, gaining intellectual hygiene against the believe of creating the sacred and universal Truth. Moreover, theoretical thinking is a crucial activity that play a central role in science, specifically when renewing fields of research. Theories defines observables how phenomena that require explanation ([Longo2016](reference/Longo2016.md)). The "self-renewal" of disciplines depends on this reflexive and critical activity, whose down side is to have a low productivity compared to empirical approaches. Biology ([Soto2021](reference/Soto2021.md)) and psychological sciences ([Muthukrishna2019](reference/Muthukrishna2019.md)) are both experiencing important such problems. An industrialized research jeopardize its existence by focysing on productivity, neglecting theoretical thinking. The partition of science, without theoretical controversies, does not encourage reflexivity, and that can leave fields in state of *theory disruption*, as recently suggested ([Montevil2021](reference/Montevil2021.md)). 


#### Automaticity is automatically the mean and the goal of research  
The so-called "linear model for innovation" (or its new extension that encourages to blur those frontiers) relates the pathway from research to technologies: basic research, applied resarch, development and diffusion of technologies. However, following the lines of the OECD at the same period, the linear chain extends to economic growth. 

>[!quote]
>
>If governments succeed in helping to increase the pace of technical innovation, it will facilitate structural changes in the economy, and increase the supply of new and improved products necessary for Member Governments to achieve rapid economic growth and full employment and without inflation. ([OECD1966](reference/OECD1966.md) , p.8)

If the goal of the scientific enterprise is growth and international competitivity since the 60's — which it still is ([Petit2019](reference/Petit2019.md)) —, research *de facto* aims at building technologies since then. To justify such a goal, OECD S&T policy makers maintain a unambiguous and therefore naive view of technology. For instance, a long policy paper on robots concludes that "Progress in robotics will help to make life easier, richer and healthier." ([Nolan2021](reference/Nolan2021.md)). From this perspective, all technologies are good, an opinion that seems to remain valid in the new "responsible innovation" paradigm ([Blok2015a](reference/Blok2015a.md)). Making automatons (e.g. machines, programs, protocoles, etc.) is therefore the unquestionned long-term goal of science. This drives basic research to look for mechanisms in nature. Also, this encourages saving only the operational part of theories. From *logos*, they become *techné* ([Morin1982](reference/Morin1982.md), [Stiegler2021](reference/Stiegler2021.md)). The intensive trend for the protocolization of research (usually to make it more reproducible) hide the automatic adoption of unknown black-box tools and can therefore reduce theoretical thinking. This confusion between objectivity and automaticity also reveals itself in the important synthetic process of review articles, which are not qualified as original research, except when computational meta-analysis are performed ([Montevil2021](reference/Montevil2021.md)). Last but not least, a infinitly powerful artifical intelligence making correlations will not replace the work of scientists ([Calude2017](reference/Calude2017.md)), despite the willing of ([Anderson2008](reference/Anderson2008.md)) and others inclined to this pervasive idea. 





[^1]: Another possibility that is not considered by policy makers and that would be different from this averaging is to take random directions from citizens or industrials. However, the pertinence of such directions is doubtious. 
[^2]: The realistic validity of such models is of course doubtious when they conclude that the "publish-or-perish" paradigm *reduce* misconduct. 