---
title: "pre-note on the organicist tradition"
date: 2023-01-17
draft: true
showthedate: true
enabletoc: true
tags:
- note
---

#### Kant (teleology)
In 1790, Immanuel Kant refers to biological systems as self-organising entities, but struggles to reconcile teleology and mechanical physics. ([Kant1790](reference/Kant1790.md))

#### Claude Bernard (physiology)
Claude Bernard wants to detach himself from vitalists ([Bernard1865](reference/Bernard1865.md), [Bernard1879](reference/Bernard1879.md)). 
He introduces the notion of *milieu* and distinguishes the internal and external *milieu* of biological systems. 
The internal milieu *self-determines* (all components contribute to the realisation of the conditions in which all other components can exist) and is stable despite the variations of the external milieu. 

#### Cannon (homeostatis)
Homeostasis: the capability of actively compensating for environmental perturbations through a coordinated physiological action. ([Cannon1929](reference/Cannon1929.md))

#### von Bertalanffy and Schrödinger (thermodynamic openeness)
Flux of energy and matter flow throught living beings ([Schrodinger1944](reference/Schrodinger1944.md), [VonBertalanffy1952](reference/VonBertalanffy1952.md))

#### Wiener and Ashby (cybernetics)
Homeostasis is mathematically expressed in terms of feedback loops by first-order Cybernetics. ([Wiener1948](reference/Wiener1948.md), [Ashby1957](reference/Ashby1957.md) )

#### Waddington and Weiss (biological applications of cybernetics)
Specific application of cybernetics for biological process (canalisation of "molecular self-organisation", with "quasi-finalistic" process). ([Weiss1968](reference/Weiss1968.md), [Waddington1968](reference/Waddington1968.md)). 
Waddington says homeostasis should be interpreted as *homeorhesis* (stability of dynamics rather than stability of states). 

#### Piaget (organisational closure)
Duality of thermodynamical openeness and organisational closure. Biological systems self-determine because they are organised, and they are organised because they realise closure ([Piaget1967](reference/Piaget1967.md)). 

#### Maturana and Varela (auto-poiese)
Biological systems self-determine in the specific sense that they “make themselves” (auto-poiein) ([Maturana1973](reference/Maturana1973.md)) 

#### Rosen (distinction of different causes)
Distinguishes material and efficient causalities: “a material system is an organism if, and only if, it is closed to efficient causation” ([Rosen1991](reference/Rosen1991.md)).  

#### Kauffman (work-constraint cycle)
In Piaget's tradition for the "thermodynamic grounding" of biology and Atkin's idea  of work as "constrained release of energy" ([Atkins1984](reference/Atkins1984.md)). A circular relationship between work and constraints must be established in a system in order to achieve self-determination. Constraints which apply to the system are not independently given (as in the Carnot engine) but rather are produced and maintained by the system itself. Hence, the system needs to use the work generated by the constraints in order to generate those very constraints, by establishing a mutual relationship, i.e. a cycle, between constraints and work. “work-constraint (W-C) cycle”.([Kauffman2000](reference/Kauffman2000.md))

#### Montévil and Mossio (closure of constraints)
