---
title: "personal story"
date: 2022-12-06
showthedate: true
draft: false
---

I grew up in Toulouse, where I ended up doing a two-year intensive scientific class in Lycée Pierre de Fermat. Then I “went up” (we say _monter_ à Paris in the south of France) at the École Normale Supérieure (ENS) de Paris, in the Chemistry Department. In parallel of these three rich years, I pursued a Master degree analytical, physical and theoretical Chemistry (CAPT) at Sorbonne Université, which is a member of Paris Sciences et Lettres (PSL).

At the end of my first year at the ENS, I no longer had doubts regarding what I wanted to do for a living: research! In this interdisciplinary school, I would take extra biology or anthropology courses. I specialized in theoretical chemistry and worked a lot with members of the PASTEUR group (UMR 8640). Conducting chemistry simulations on classical hardwares made me want to understand the promises of quantum computing for Chemistry. I went six months in IBM Zurich, in the group of Ivano Tavernelli. The internship went so well that we continued working together for one more year. At the end of the day, my first articles, patents, and excellent research memories. Back in Paris, I've worked on an in silico drug discovery code with Maximilien Levesque, who is now CEO and co-founder of AQEMIA. Then, I was contracted by the CNRS for a PhD thesis under the direction of Marie-Laure and Lydéric Bocquet to work on nanofluidics topics. I defended my PhD thesis at the ENS in September 2022: “New approach for electrostatic interactions at metal/liquid interfaces and applications for the graphene/water couple.”

For more than a year, I've been preparing another project. It started with some readings, such as _La méthode_ of Edgar Morin, which encouraged me to know more about complex systems physics, philosophy of science, and most importantly the organicist tradition in biology (I. Kant, C. Bernard, W.B. Cannon, L. von Bertalanffy, E. Schrödinger, N. Wiener, W.R. Ashby, C.H. Waddington, J. Piaget, H. Maturana, F. Varela, R. Rosen, S. Kauffman). From those readings, I realized that concepts from this tradition were desperately needed to face today's biosphere crisis. However, those ideas crossed centuries without being established in universities, because they lacked the empirico-logical rigor of a scientific theory.

Looking for current representatives of this tradition throughout the universities of several countries, I came across an interdisciplinary group... at the ENS (G. Longo, M. Mossio, M. Montévil, and the other members of the Blaise Pascal Chair of Ana Soto)! They had understood the need for a rigorous epistemological and theoretical work for those ideas to come to fruition. It allowed them, for instance, to answer Schrödinger's question: “How do organisms resist the second law of thermodynamics?”. They were also convinced that those notions were crucial to understand the Anthropocene: they brought new conceptual tools to the philosopher Bernard Stielger. I had found the ecosystem I was looking for.