---
title: "PhD project"
date: 2023-03-30
showthedate: true
draft: false
enabletoc: true
---

==**(*see French version below*)**==

# Methods and epistemological limits of an organicist biology


#### Abstract

This project aims to bring to fruition a theoretical framework that posits non-mechanistic principles for understanding organisms. It proposes to elaborate methods, know-how and generally applicable guidelines that will allow biologists to make these concepts their own, and use them in practice to generate new knowledge. The epistemological question regards the types of knowledge that one can generate with models stemming from theories that emphasize, for example, the irreducible unpredictability of the variation of organisms or the specific circularity of their organization. Oscillating between modeling and critical reflexivity, this work will mature thanks to methodological experiments that will be the object of scientific publications, and thanks to discussions with several epistemologists concerning the difficulties (inherent or accidental) encountered along the way. By contributing to the understanding of viable organizational modes of material and functional entities, this interdisciplinary work also grounds relevant concepts to think/heal (_pænser_) the Anthropocene.

#### Context

The Anthropocene is a symptom, at least in part, of a mechanistic view of life. This philosophy (symbolized by the founding thought of Descartes) is today strongly criticized, but biology is slowly moving forward. It is indeed common to hear that we need to “change our relationship with living beings”, rarely that we need new theories in biology. However, in 1913, Radl already noted that a scientist who feels that he belongs to nature and who does not stand before it as before foreign phenomena, is a vitalist—not a mechanist ([Canguilhem1992a](reference/Canguilhem1992a.md)). The proximity of contemporary ecological debates to the history of biology should invite us to an epistemological reflection on our current practices. Should we not be alarmed that a theory allows, in 2020, the awarding of the Nobel Prize to someone claiming one can “reprogram” life or “control evolution” ([Doudna2017](reference/Doudna2017.md),[Longo2021](reference/Longo2021.md))? Does this lack of rigor not lead to disastrous political choices—like the Genetic Technology Bill nowadays?

Dismissing mechanism—and its contributions to biology—too quickly would amount to making the same mistake, the one of forgetting the history of science. The excesses of this philosophy are not peculiar to our time, they have been appearing with more or less insistence for several centuries, so that for Canguilhem, vitalism would embody “the permanent mistrust of life in front of the mechanization of life”([Canguilhem1992a](reference/Canguilhem1992a.md)). Nevertheless, the omnipresence of interconnected digital artifacts forces us today to deeply rethink the terms of this debate and its stakes. Vaucanson's duck has been digitalized with the central dogma of molecular biology ([Longo2012](reference/Longo2012.md)), and any sufficiently “intelligent” algorithm takes shape in a hardware to which we too easily lend life ([Roli2022](reference/Roli2022.md)).

In science, this dialectic of the organism and the machine is revealed in the mathematical models used to describe the living. Although many people rightfully refuse to assimilate an organism to a machine, most studies carried out in biology resort to the epistemology of physics. For example, one encounters the notion of noise (for measurement), the notion of equilibrium (Hardy-Weinberg), the transfer of information (central dogma of molecular biology), a unimodal probability distribution for allele frequencies (which institutes a deviation from a mean), gene networks described on predefined topologies (Waddington), optimizations to describe morphologies (fractals, surface/volume ratio, etc.), a diversity of programs (genomes) selected by external forces (environment). By using methods adapted to inert matter, we learn about the constituents of a being, about the physico-chemical processes that constitute it, but we do not talk about organisms (bio-_logos_, talking about the living). So, can we properly model organisms? With our machines? How ([Glade2022](reference/Glade2022.md))?

These questions are not unrelated to the current instabilities of the theoretical framework of biology. The models described above are ways of making it sensible, and thus reveal the physicalist reductionism that underlies it — which posits that _theories_ in biology must be reducible to the ones of physics. The recognition of the influences of development and plasticity of organisms on evolution has challenged the neo-Darwinian approach ([West-Eberhard2003](reference/West-Eberhard2003.md)). Synthetic evolutionary theory, in its extended version ([Laland2015](reference/Laland2015.md)), recognizes non-genetic transmissions, the emergence of phenotypic novelties, the possibility for an organism to modify its environment, and other complexities for understanding the biosphere. Nevertheless, in regaining its validity, this extension hardly provides new fruitful methods. Rather, it weakens itself by tolerating observations that contradict the principles that constitute its core. For a theory to keep its internal coherence while retaining deductive power, it needs rigorous, exploitable and generative principles, that is to say, principles that posit necessities and not possibilities.

A long organicist tradition has seen Claude Bernard, Jean Piaget, or even Francisco Varela try to rigorously define what, in the 18th century, Immanuel Kant had defined as an entity capable of self-organization. Recently, a formal definition grounded in non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and bringing together the efforts of the last decades, has been proposed ([Montevil2015](reference/Montevil2015.md), [Kauffman2019](reference/Kauffman2019.md)). This work is part of a broader scientific adventure that aims to push the frontiers of biology in new directions ([Bailly2011](reference/Bailly2011.md),[Noble2015](reference/Noble2015.md), [Soto2016](reference/Soto2016.md),[Kauffman2019](reference/Kauffman2019.md))—beyond the paradigm that conceives of living beings by analogy with machines. Thus, three principles have been posited to describe an organism ([Soto2016](reference/Soto2016.md)). They result from an important epistemological reflection to distinguish biology from physics (or integrate the latter as a singularity into the former). As a reminder, physics studies the changes of the state of a system in a predefined space, on the basis of invariants and symmetries. This discipline is interested in the relations between generic properties of objects (mass, charge, size, etc.).

The _principle of variation_ posits that biological organisms are specific, that is, the mathematical structure necessary to describe them varies over time in a fundamentally unpredictable way. Since variations relevant in biology are functional, this principle implies that describing an object of study requires talking about its _history_ and _context_, which are unique.

In parallel to Galileo's principle of inertia, _the default state principle of cells_ is posited: they are motile, and proliferate (with variation according to the first principle, because cells are different from one another). The causes that must be explained by the biological theory are, as in physics, the deviations from the state of inertia. However, we are no longer looking for external forces acting on an object to set it in motion, but for the constraints that act on the cellular default state. We must explain reduced mobility, absence or excess of proliferation, but not motility or proliferation per se.

The _principle of organization_ emerges from the work that formalizes Kant's idea, as mentioned above. It postulates that organisms are organized in the sense that they realize the _closure of constraint_, where the crucial concepts of biological processes, constraints and functions are rigorously defined. This notion provides theoretical roots for the notion of biological autonomy ([Moreno2015](reference/Moreno2015.md)).

The changes for science are major, as the regularities of a system are no longer explained by appealing to the regularity of its constituent parts (and their interactions). In this new paradigm, the parts of the system vary intrinsically, and the stability of the system comes from its circular organization. This is an ontological shift (for the living) that opens up truly new and relevant paths. Epistemology, theories, and modeling in biology cannot be reduced to those of physics.

More recently, the successive articulations of these principles have led to several concepts. First, the concept of anti-entropy which mobilizes the historicity of organisms ([Montevil2020](reference/Montevil2020.md)) and the closure of constraint. Second, the concept of anti-entropy production integrates the notion of novelty with the principle of organization ([Montevil2019a](reference/Montevil2019a.md)). These two concepts, which thus raise the question of biological time (past for history or future for novelties), are also fruitful for rigorously theorizing the concept of disruption in biology ([Montevil2022](reference/Montevil2022.md)).

Finally, those concepts, that emerge from theoretical biology, allow us to understand some systemic problems of the Anthropocene ([Montevil2021a](reference/Montevil2021a.md)). Briefly, according to Bernard Stielger and the Internation collective, this period can be characterized by a temporal lag between a technical system and the knowledge necessary for its individual and social appropriation. Thus, the degradation of the biosphere by technologies requires an in-depth rethinking of the functioning of our exosomatic organs ([Lotka1945](reference/Lotka1945.md), [Canguilhem1992b](reference/Canguilhem1992b.md)). Integrating the technosphere into the biosphere requires the ability to describe viable organizational modes of biological and economic processes, i.e., those that resist the degradation of time, i.e., that resist entropy ([Stiegler2021](reference/Stiegler2021.md)). The stakes of an organicist theoretical biology, or more particularly of an organology, are not only epistemic ones, and they have the potential to make a difference in facing today's biosphere crisis.

#### Question and goal of the project

For this epistemological and theoretical adventure to bear fruit, the work carried out must be put into the hands of biologists with methods. A method is not a mechanical protocol, but a know-how that allows biologist-artisans to appropriate and use in practice theories to generate new knowledge. It is shared by establishing generally applicable guidelines; these are strategies to be interpreted more or less freely, not programs.

The stakes of this project are not only operational, because it is not obvious that an organicist biology can be so! In an organism, unlike a machine, the existence of its constituents depends on the functioning of the whole. Its parts cannot be isolated, its circularity prevents non-intrusive analysis. Moreover, what can the biologist say in front of novelties, unpredictable by definition? René Thom said, in a clear-sighted burst of physico-mathematician intellectual honesty, that Darwin's theory was not scientific, because the possibilities of evolution were not predefined. The question that underlies the project is then: what kind of knowledge can an organicist biology generate about living beings? The best way to answer this question is to develop a method and discuss its epistemic contributions. We will discuss the nature of the obstacles we encounter in dialogue with relevant thinkers and clarify the modeling difficulties that are intrinsic to an organicist biology.

Pragmatically, as an example, a part of physics instantiate its theories by a method that consists in identifying invariants (symmetries, conservation law, etc.) to give a differential equation, specifying initial and boundary conditions, then solving analytically or numerically the problem. The work I propose aims to develop an equivalent for biology studies, based on the principles mentioned above.

#### How?

“Methods come at the end” according to Nietzsche. Indeed, it is necessary to model and experiment to take a critical look, then to pose general and shareable strategies. Our main contribution will therefore only be written after three years, but it requires methodological experiments (and therefore scientific productions) to do so.

Today, most biological models use the tools of physics or statistics to interpret empirical or computationally generated data. In contrast to this inductive approach, the proposed models will have to proceed from the theoretical framework ([Glade2022](reference/Glade2022.md)). This work will necessarily see the emergence of novelties in terms of know-how, beyond a simple combination or arrangement of practices used in biophysics. Some promising initial attempts have been made ([Montevil2016b](reference/Montevil2016b.md), [Bich2020](reference/Bich2020.md), [Montevil2022](reference/Montevil2022.md)). They are examples of the modeling work we need to do and _then_ generalize to provide transferable guidelines. Discussions and collaborations with the authors of these papers are expected, especially with Matteo Mossio and Leonardo Bich. Before undertaking these efforts, a solid grasp of the theoretical concepts is necessary, as well as a fine appreciation of the epistemological issues involved in modeling in theoretical biology ([Glade2015](reference/Glade2015.md)). Potential collaborators, such as Franck Varenne, can contribute to guide the research, or participate in the epistemological discussion regarding the insights brought by the elaborated methods ([Varenne2013](reference/Varenne2013.md)).

Let us say a little more about the work that will be carried out. The closure of constraint has a valuable diagrammatic representation on which other concepts specific to organisms can be grammaticalized ([Montevil2020a](reference/Montevil2020a.md)). This will be a starting point. It seems that we can distinguish three stages in our future work. First, we will need to understand to what extent the closure of constraint enriches the modeling of biological phenomena ([Bich2020](reference/Bich2020.md)). Can one assemble partial models coming from biophysics to describe the whole organism? What does the organicist view bring to the modeling of the parts? Can we obtain quantitative models? Can the self-determination (in the form of self-constraint) of an organism be numerically implemented? Concrete applications will be produced, criticized and compared to be generalized.

The incorporation of the historicity of organs into the modeling of organisms is the second Gordian knot of the project. While physics is based on a relational epistemology, biology must integrate the historicity of organisms to define them. Articulated with the principle of organization, the concept of anti-entropy comes into play. Experimentally, new practices have been prescribed ([Montevil2019](reference/Montevil2019.md)), but it is also necessary to introduce a phylogenetic and ontogenetic history into the modeling of the functions of an organism.

Finally, the concept of anti-entropy production refers to the change in the space of relevant observables to describe the living system ([Montevil2022](reference/Montevil2022.md)). Unpredictable functional variations allow new possibilities and project the organism into a new space of description. The question of temporality will be central here, because the continuous physical time is no longer the relevant observable. The irreducible duration of cycles in the life of organisms (heartbeat, breathing, day, seasons, etc.) prevent laws of evolution based on infinitesimal differentials of time. What can a scientific method tell when it chooses to speak of unpredictable novelties in a conceivable space, rather than meaningless states in a fundamentally non-ergodic system? How can digital machines help the elaboration of an organicist biological modeling practice?


#### ==**French version**==

# Méthodes et limites épistémologiques d'une biologie organiciste


#### Résumé

Cette thèse se propose de faire fructifier un travail théorique qui pose des principes non mécanicistes pour comprendre les organismes. Elle se propose d'élaborer des méthodes, des savoir-faire, des lignes directrices généralement applicables qui permettront à des biologistes de s'approprier et d'utiliser en pratique ces concepts pour générer des savoirs nouveaux. L'enjeu épistémologique concerne les types de connaissances qui peuvent être générées par des modélisations qui procèdent de théories soulignant, par exemple, l'imprédictibilité principielle de la variation des organismes ou la circularité spécifique de leur organisation. Oscillant entre modélisation et réflexivité critique, ce travail murira grâce à des expérimentations méthodologiques qui feront l'objet de publications scientifiques, et grâce aux discussions avec plusieurs épistémologues concernant les difficultés (inhérentes ou accidentelles) rencontrées en chemin. En contribuant à comprendre des modes d'organisations viables d'entités matérielles et fonctionnelles, ce travail interdisciplinaire permet aussi la prise en main de concepts pertinents pour pænser l'Anthropocène.

#### Contexte

L'Anthropocène est un symptôme, en partie au moins, d'une vision mécaniciste du vivant. Cette philosophie (symbolisée par la pensée fondatrice de Descartes) est vivement critiquée aujourd'hui, mais la biologie n'effectue que lentement sa mue. Il est en effet commun d'entendre que nous devons “changer notre rapport au vivant”, rarement qu'il faut proposer de nouvelles théories en biologie. Or, dès 1913, Radl notait déjà qu'un savant qui sent son appartenance à la nature et qui ne se tient pas devant elle comme devant des phénomènes étrangers était un vitaliste — et non un mécaniste ([Canguilhem1992a](reference/Canguilhem1992a.md)) La proximité de débats écologiques contemporains avec l'histoire de la biologie devrait nous inviter à une réflexion épistémologique sur nos pratiques actuelles. Ne devrait-on pas s'alarmer qu'une théorie permette l'attribution d'un prix Nobel en 2020 à une personne affirmant pouvoir “reprogrammer” le vivant ou “contrôler l'évolution” ([Doudna2017](reference/Doudna2017.md),[Longo2021](reference/Longo2021.md)) ? Ne procède-t-il pas de ce manque de rigueur des choix politiques désastreux — comme la _Genetic Technology Bill_ aujourd'hui ?

Congédier trop rapidement le mécanisme — et ses apports à la biologie — reviendrait à faire la même erreur, celle d'oublier l'histoire des sciences. Les excès de cette philosophie ne sont pas propres à notre époque, ils apparaissent avec plus ou moins d'insistances depuis plusieurs siècles, de sorte que pour Canguilhem, le vitalisme incarnerait “la méfiance permanente de la vie devant la mécanisation de la vie.” ([Canguilhem1992a](reference/Canguilhem1992a.md)). Néanmoins, l'omniprésence d'artefacts numériques interconnectés nous oblige aujourd'hui à repenser profondément les termes de ce débat et son enjeu. Le canard de Vaucanson s'est numérisé avec le dogme central de la biologie moléculaire ([Longo2012](reference/Longo2012.md)), et tout algorithme suffisamment “intelligent” prend corps dans un hardware auquel on prête trop facilement vie ([Roli2022](reference/Roli2022.md)).

En science, cette dialectique de l'organisme et de la machine se révèle dans les modèles mathématiques utilisés pour décrire le vivant. Bien que nombreux soient ceux qui refusent à raison l'assimilation d'un organisme à une machine, les études effectivement réalisées en biologie recourent quasiment toutes à l'épistémologie de la physique. Par exemple, on rencontre la notion de bruit (pour la mesure), la notion d'équilibre (d'Hardy-Weinberg), le transfert d'informations (dogme central de la biologie moléculaire), une distribution unimodale de probabilité pour des fréquences d'allèles (qui institue un écart à une moyenne), des réseaux de gènes décrits sur des topologies prédéfinies (Waddington), des optimisations pour décrire des morphologies (fractales, ratio surface/volume, etc.), une diversité de programmes (génomes) sélectionnés par des forces externes (environnement). En utilisant des méthodes adaptées à la matière inerte, on apprend des constituants d'un être, des processus physico-chimiques qui le constituent, mais on ne parle pas d'organismes (bio-_logos_, parler du vivant). Peut-on, alors, modéliser ces derniers ? Avec nos machines ? Comment ([Glade2022](reference/Glade2022.md))?

Ces questions ne sont pas sans rapport avec les instabilités actuelles du cadre théorique de la biologie. Les modélisations décrites ci-dessus constituent des manières de le rendre sensible, et révèlent ainsi le réductionnisme physicaliste qui le sous-tend — qui pose que les _théories_ en biologie doivent pouvoir se réduire à celles de la physique. La reconnaissance des influences du développement et de la plasticité des organismes sur l'évolution ont bousculé l'approche néodarwinienne ([West-Eberhard2003](reference/West-Eberhard2003.md)). La théorie synthétique de l'évolution, dans sa version étendue ([Laland2015](reference/Laland2015.md)), reconnait les transmissions non génétiques, l'apparition de nouveautés phénotypiques, la possibilité pour un organisme de modifier son environnement, et d'autres complexifications pour la compréhension du monde vivant. Néanmoins, en retrouvant de sa validité, cette extension n'apporte guère de nouvelles méthodes fructifiables. Plutôt, elle s'affaiblit en se permettant de tolérer des observations qui contredisent les principes qui constituent son noyau dur. Pour qu'une théorie garde sa cohérence interne tout en gardant une puissance déductive, il lui faut des principes rigoureux, exploitables et générateurs, c'est-à-dire qui posent des nécessités et non des possibilités.

Une longue tradition organiciste a vu Claude Bernard, Jean Piaget, ou encore Francisco Varela essayer de définir rigoureusement ce que, au XVIIIe siècle, Emmanuel Kant avait défini comme entité capable d'auto-organisation. Récemment, une définition formelle s'articulant à la thermodynamique hors équilibre et réunissant les efforts de ces dernières décennies a été proposée ([Montevil2015](reference/Montevil2015.md), [Kauffman2019](reference/Kauffman2019.md)). Ce travail s'inscrit dans une aventure scientifique plus large qui a pour but de faire rebondir la biologie dans de nouvelles directions ([Bailly2011](reference/Bailly2011.md),[Noble2015](reference/Noble2015.md), [Soto2016](reference/Soto2016.md),[Kauffman2019](reference/Kauffman2019.md))— au-delà du paradigme qui conçoit le vivant par analogie avec les machines. Ainsi, trois principes fondamentaux ont été posés pour décrire un organisme ([Soto2016](reference/Soto2016.md)). Ils résultent d'une réflexion épistémologique importante pour distinguer la biologie de la physique (ou intégrer la deuxième — en tant que singularité — dans la première). Pour rappel, la physique étudie les changements d'état d'un système dans un espace prédéfini, sur la base d'invariants et de symétries. Cette discipline s'intéresse aux relations entre les propriétés génériques d'objets (masse, charge, taille, etc.).

Le _principe de variation_ pose que les organismes biologiques sont spécifiques, c'est-à-dire que la structure mathématique nécessaire à leur description varie dans le temps de manière fondamentalement _imprédictible_. Étant donné que les variations pertinentes pour la biologie sont fonctionnelles, ce principe implique que décrire un objet d'étude nécessite de parler de son _histoire_ et de son _contexte_, qui sont uniques.

Parallèlement au principe d'inertie de Galilée, _le principe d'état par défaut des cellules_ est posé : elles sont _motiles_, et _prolifèrent_ (avec variation selon le premier principe, car elles sont différentes deux à deux). Les causes qui doivent être explicitées par la théorie biologique sont, comme en physique, les écarts à l'état d'inertie. Cependant, on ne cherche plus les forces extérieures s'exerçant sur un objet pour le mettre en mouvement, mais les _contraintes_ qui agissent sur l'état par défaut cellulaire. On doit expliquer une mobilité amoindrie, l'absence ou l'excès de prolifération, mais pas la motilité ni la prolifération en soi.

Le troisième _principe d'organisation_ émerge du travail qui formalise l'idée de Kant, mentionnée plus haut. Il postule qu'un organisme est organisé selon le modèle de _clôture de contraintes_, où les concepts cruciaux de processus, contraintes et fonctions biologiques sont rigoureusement définis. Cette notion permet de donner des racines théoriques à la notion d'autonomie biologique ([Moreno2015](reference/Moreno2015.md)).

Les changements pour la science sont majeurs, car on explique plus les régularités d'un système en faisant appel à la régularité de ses parties constituantes (et de leurs interactions). Dans ce nouveau paradigme, les parties du système varient intrinsèquement, et la stabilité du système procède de son organisation circulaire. C'est un basculement ontologique (pour le vivant) qui ouvre des voies véritablement nouvelles et pertinentes. L'épistémologie, les théories, et les modélisations en biologie ne peuvent être réduites à celles de la physique.

Plus récemment, les articulations successives de ces principes ont conduit à plusieurs concepts. D'abord celui d'_anti-entropie_ qui mobilise l'historicité des organismes ([Montevil2020](reference/Montevil2020.md)) et la clôture de contrainte. Ensuite, le concept de production d'anti-entropie intègre la notion de nouveauté au principe d'organisation ([Montevil2019a](reference/Montevil2019a.md)). Ces deux concepts, qui posent ainsi la question du temps biologique (passé pour l'histoire ou futur pour les nouveautés), sont aussi fructueux pour théoriser rigoureusement le concept de disruption en biologie ([Montevil2022](reference/Montevil2022.md)). 

Enfin, ces concepts de biologie théorique permettent de comprendre des problèmes systémiques de l'Anthropocène ([Montevil2021a](reference/Montevil2021a.md)). Brièvement, selon Bernard Stielger et le collectif Internation, cette période peut se caractériser par un décalage entre un système technique et les savoirs nécessaires à son appropriation individuelle et sociale. Ainsi, la dégradation de la biosphère par des technologies nécessite de repenser en profondeur le fonctionnement de nos organes exosomatiques ([Lotka1945](reference/Lotka1945.md), [Canguilhem1992b](reference/Canguilhem1992b.md)). Intégrer la technosphère dans la biosphère nécessite de pouvoir décrire des modes d'organisation de processus biologiques et économiques viables, c'est-à-dire qui résiste à la dégradation du temps, c'est-à-dire à l'entropie ([Stiegler2020](reference/Stiegler2020.md)). Les enjeux d'une biologie théorique organiciste, ou plus particulièrement d'une organologie, dépassent ainsi le cadre de la science.

#### Question et objectif du projet

Pour que cette aventure épistémologique et théorique puisse fructifier, le travail effectué doit pouvoir être mis entre les mains de biologistes avec des _méthodes_. Une méthode n'est pas un protocole mécanique, mais un savoir-faire qui permet à des biologistes-artisans de s'approprier et utiliser en pratique des théories pour générer des savoirs nouveaux. Il se partage en établissant des lignes directrices généralement applicables; celles-ci sont des stratégies qu'il faut interpréter plus ou moins librement, pas des programmes.

Les enjeux de ce projet ne sont pas seulement opérationnels, car il n'est pas évident qu'une biologie organiciste puisse l'être ! Dans un organisme, à l'inverse de la machine, l'existence des constituants dépend du fonctionnement du tout. Ses parties ne sont pas isolables, sa circularité empêche l'analyse non intrusive. De plus, que peut dire le biologiste devant des nouveautés, imprédictibles par définition ? René Thom disait, dans un élan clairvoyant d'honnêteté intellectuelle de physico-mathématicien, que la théorie de Darwin n'était pas scientifique, car les possibilités de l'évolution n'étaient pas prédéfinies. La question qui sous-tend le projet est alors : quels types de connaissances une biologie organiciste peut-elle générer sur le vivant ? La meilleure façon de répondre à cette question est d'élaborer une méthode et discuter la nature de ses apports épistémiques. Nous discuterons la nature des obstacles que nous rencontrerons en dialogue avec des penseurs pertinents et clarifierons les difficultés de modélisation inhérente à la biologie théorique — organiciste.

Très concrètement, à titre d'exemple, une partie de la physique actualise ses théories et postulats par une méthode qui consiste à identifier des invariants (symétries, loi de conservation, etc.) pour donner une équation différentielle, à préciser des conditions initiales (et/ou aux bords), puis à résoudre analytiquement ou numériquement le problème. Le travail que je propose vise à élaborer un équivalent pour des études de biologie qui se basent sur les principes et les théories mentionnées plus haut.

#### Comment ?

“Les méthodes viennent à la fin” d'après Nietzsche. En effet, il faut modéliser et expérimenter pour porter un regard critique, puis poser des stratégies générales et partageables. Notre contribution principale ne pourra donc s'écrire qu'au bout de trois ans, mais elle nécessite des expérimentations méthodologiques (donc des productions scientifiques) pour ce faire.

La plupart des modélisations en biologie utilisent aujourd'hui les outils de la physique ou des statistiques pour interpréter des données empiriques, ou computationellement générées. À l'inverse de cette démarche inductive, les modélisations proposées devront procéder d'une mise en pratique du cadre théorique ([Glade2022](reference/Glade2022.md)). Ce travail verra nécessairement l'apparition de nouveautés en termes de savoir-faire, au-delà d'une simple combinaison ou d'agencement de pratiques utilisées en biophysique. Quelques premières tentatives prometteuses ont été réalisées ([Montevil2016b](reference/Montevil2016b.md), [Bich2020](reference/Bich2020.md), [Montevil2022](reference/Montevil2022.md)). Elles sont des exemples des travaux de modélisation que nous devons effectuer, _puis_ généraliser pour donner des lignes directrices instituables. Des discussions et des collaborations étroites avec les auteurs de ces papiers sont attendues, notamment avec Matteo Mossio et Leonardo Bich.

Avant d'entreprendre ces efforts, une appropriation solide des concepts théoriques est nécessaire ainsi qu'une fine appréciation des enjeux épistémologiques liés à la modélisation en biologie théorique ([Glade2015](reference/Glade2015.md)). De potentiels collaborateurs, comme Franck Varenne, peuvent apporter leurs expériences pour orienter les recherches, ou participer à la discussion épistémologique concernant l'apport des méthodes générées ([Varenne2013](reference/Varenne2013.md)).

Détaillons un peu plus le travail qui sera effectué. La notion de clôture de contrainte possède une écriture diagrammatique précieuse sur laquelle les autres concepts propres aux organismes peuvent se grammatiser ([Montevil2020a](reference/Montevil2020a.md)). Nous utiliserons donc cet atout. Il semble que nous pouvons distinguer trois étapes de notre travail futur. D'abord il faudra comprendre dans quelles mesures la clôture de contraintes enrichit la modélisation des phénomènes biologiques ([Bich2020](reference/Bich2020.md)). Les modélisations biophysiques et bio-informatiques des parties d'un organisme peuvent-elles s'agencer pour la description du tout ? Qu'apporte la vision organiciste pour les modélisations des parties ? de l'organisme ? Peut-on formaliser une modélisation quantitative ? Est-ce que l'auto-détermination (sous forme d'auto-contrainte) d'un organisme est numériquement simulable ? Des applications concrètes seront produites, critiquées et comparées pour être généralisées.

L'incorporation de l'historicité des organes dans la modélisation des organismes est le second nœud gordien du projet. Alors que la physique repose sur une épistémologie relationnelle, la biologie doit intégrer l'historicité des organismes pour les définir. Articulé au principe d'organisation, c'est le concept d'anti-entropie qui entre ici en jeu. Expérimentalement, de nouvelles pratiques ont été prescrites ([Montevil2019](reference/Montevil2019.md)), mais il faut aussi pouvoir introduire une histoire phylogénétique et ontogénétique dans la modélisation des fonctions d'un organisme. Il y aura ici à élaborer des pratiques mixtes, entre la physiologie et l'histoire.

Finalement, le concept de production d'anti-entropie réfère au changement d'espace des observables pertinentes pour décrire le système vivant ([Montevil2022](reference/Montevil2022.md)). Une variation fonctionnelle imprédictible permet de nouvelles possibilités et projette l'organisme dans un espace de description nouveau. La question de la temporalité sera ici centrale, car le temps continu de la physique n'est plus l'observable pertinente. Les temps irréductibles des cycles qui rythment la vie d'organismes (du battement, de la respiration, du jour, de la saison) prohibent les lois d'évolutions basées sur des différentielles infinitésimales du temps. Que peut apporter une méthode scientifique qui choisit de parler de nouveautés imprédictibles dans un espace concevable, plutôt que d'états dépourvus de sens dans un système foncièrement non ergodique ? Que faire des machines numériques dans l'élaboration d'une biologie théorique rigoureuse ?