
---
title: "The principle of variation and biological objects"
date: 2023-03-24
draft: false
showthedate: true
enabletoc: true
tags:
- writing
---


### How does physics work? 

Physics uses *generic* objects: objects sharing some common *properties* (mass, charge, length, etc. ) that can be permutated while leaving the theoretical analysis invariant. This is because physics co-evolved with mathematics, that uses *abstract* objects. Any abstract object of mass $m$ is generic, because it can be a shoe or an apple for classical mechanics. They are *identical* for a given theory.

A mathematical equation governs the dynamics of the *state* of an object in a *predefined* space — called "phase space" in physics — of pertinent observables (e.g., position, momenta, angle, energy, etc.). All possibilities are given in advance, and a *specific* trajectory is merely a partial order indexed by a variable that we can call time. 

Equations governing the change of state of generic objects are valid in the entire phase space. They are not concerned about the specific values of the object's propreties, but about the *relations* between the properties of objects, and their state. Most physical properties are actually defined in a relational way (charge, mass, friction coefficients, solubility, elasticity, etc.), and we can consider that physics rely on a relational, synchronic epistemology.

Let's sum up, the *specific* trajectory of a *generic* object is given as a partial order on a *predefined* set of possibilities. This phase space fixes the pertinent observables to describe its *state*. Changes are change of state, and they are given by a mathematical equation that is concerned by the differential effect caused by a *relation* between states and *properties* of objects, *for all* possible values of the predefined states and properties. 

At the core of this physical description of matter lies the crucial notion of *symmetry*, which is invariance under transformation. First, *generic* objects are symmetric for the intended theory. Second, the objectivity of phase spaces rely on the invariance of the observables by a suitable transformation of the reference frame. Lastly, equations are justified using conservation laws that rely on symmetries (Noether's theorem). 

In sum, physics understands change (of state of objects) thanks to invariance (under some transformations). Symmetries (for objects, for observables, for time) the use of abstract objects to extend objectivity by stating what is *identical* (objects, experiments, energy/matter).  

### Could physics provide a rigourous framework for biology? 

The objects of biology are organisms, but organisms are not invariant under the flow of time, because they develop and evolve. Therefore, physics cannot use organisms as an object *per se*. In physics, an organisms can only be encountered as result of the interactions between a multitude of invariant objects. However, even cells are created, change, and disappear. Physics must then use sub-cellular elements to describe organisms. While this option is possible in principle, it is far from obvious that it is most convenient approach. Pragmatically, physics is still far from being able to understand or model a single cell. Therefore, while being different from physics, an rigorous theoretical frame that uses organisms as objects, could increase objectivity in biology. 

### A sound departure from determinism 

We argue that departing from physics means giving up a deterministic view of biological phenomena. The latter is enshrined in physicalist reductionnism (theories of natural sciences are reducible to those of physics), that usually take two aspects. For neopreformationist, it is complete genetic determinism. Life can be written by combinations of four letters, materialized by nucleotides. Therefore, organisms can be enumerated, and they all preexist. For others, living beings can be understood with the deterministic trajectories of atoms because they are made of such particles. Of course, those two claims are seldom endorsed as such by scientists. Rather, they are moderated by mentioning, for instance, epigenetics in the first case, the impredictibility of quantum mechanics or chaos theory in the second. 

However, in both cases, problems do not emerge from the fact that additional effects are ignored (which would make complete determinism a bad approximation). Rather, it lies in the fact that the chosen observables are not pertinent for the *understanding* of organisms, starting with their viability. A extraordinary small part of those phase spaces are relevant for biology, *as far as we know*. Even if we endorse complete genetic determinism, DNA sequences that program living beings represent an extremely small number of all the ones that can be enumerated. Atomic positions and velocities that can be attribuated to organisms are nearly singularities in the corresponding phase space. Almost all elements of those spaces do not represent an organism (Fig.1a). In physical terms, those spaces are explored by the universe in a strongly non ergodic way ([Kauffman2019](reference/Kauffman2019.md))

Giving up on these kind of descriptions because of their lack of biological meaning, does not imply ignoring their importance in other theoretical frames (e.g., for DNA sequencing, for physics). However, for biology, they only constitute pre-possibilities ([Montevil2019a](reference/Montevil2019a.md)). We need to gather some of the biological meaningful pre-possibilities to constitute a subset a pertinent set of possibilities, *as far as we can tell*. This requires finding those singularities in the original phase space, redefining the observables[^1] to reconfigure those possibilities in a meaningful smaller set, and zooming in (Fig.1b, first panel). 

### Biology is a theoretical sport

Preserving biological meaning by solely considering a relevant set of possibilities comes at a cost. First, adding a possibility in this frameless phase space means having seen it being realized. In other words, the pertinent space of description of organisms is *historical*. Second, adding a new possibility means that the organism has realized this possibility, and that this possibility was not one before that. Therefore, organisms can vary in a fundamentally *unpredictable* way for the theoretical framework. This defines a strong an irreducible notion of randomness in biology (Fig.1b, second panel) Third, because the pertinent observables are established according to the current possibilities, they can also change in time. In sum, the overall mathematical structure that describe an organism change in time (Fig.1b, third panel). 

Let's dwell on this last point. Biophysicists always predefine possibilities for the evolution of the functional parts of organisms, for epistemological reasons. The posited phase space always proceed from empirical observations, at a given time (Fig.1c, first panel). However, we have seen that the physico-mathematical modelling of organisms — and *a fortiori* one of its pertinent observable — can only be valid for a finite duration. The simulation of a functional part of an organism, sooner or later, will no longer be valid because the organism is not quantitatively *and* qualitatively invariant in time (Fig.1c, second panel).

In fact, biophysical models often raise an epistemological problem. In fixing values of parameters or initial/boundary conditions to simulate functional parts of an organism, biophysicists seldom justified them with theoretical arguments. This is incompatible with the physical approach, whose objectivity aims to provides general insights about relations between generic objects. It requires discussing a phenomenon for a range of values of parameters to bring epistemic insights ([Montevil2022a](reference/Montevil2022a.md)). For instance, free fall is the physical insight brought by physical models showing that an object of *any* mass (negligeable compared to the one of Earth), and initially dropped at *any* altitude, end up on the ground.

However, parameters and initial/boundary conditions in biophysical models of functional parts *are* specific. Yet, they can be understood only in the light of previous models of the organism, that is its history. Moreover, whereas physics relies on a relational epistemology, it does not account for the specific circular organization of the functional parts of an organism that allows it to self-maintain. Therefore, an organicist epistemology requires to resort to the epistemology of history and an epistemology of self-maintaining physical systems. Accordingly, *biological models need to sychronically and diachronically articulate physico-mathematical models of an organism's functional parts* (Fig.1c). 

### Defining biological objects

In physics, objects are abstract mathematical objects, which are extracted from the flow of time. They are defined by some properties that can be shared: they are generic. This is not the case of organisms such that a first principle can be stated. 

*The principle of variation*: ==organisms are **specific** objects==.

Specific can be understood as the contrary of generic. Specific objects are material objects, and two of them always have a qualitative difference with respect to a given theoretical frame. Specific objects differ from one another because they undergo *unpredictable* variations that make the mathematical framework to describe them change in time. Accordingly, specific objects cannot be understood whitout the *history* of their variations, that justifies the phase space in which the organism is described. 

**Context** and history. 
Les ressemblances ne peuvent venir que d'une histoire partagée. 
**Hybrid and bounded in time.**

### About measurement in biology (predictability)
